# Mathematics for Simplicial Complexes Language

In this file I will document the mathematical concepts and structures that I will use to implement the language for simplicial complexes.

## Simplicial Complexes

**Definition:**:
The **vertices** are *countable ordered* set 
$V := \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, \}$. 
Each element of V is called a **vertex**.

**Definition:**
A **simplicial complex** $K$ is a collection of finite subsets of $V$ called **simplices** such that:

$$
    \text{For each } \sigma \in K \text{ and } \tau \subseteq \sigma, \text{} \tau \in K.
$$

Each element $ \sigma \in K $ is called a **simplex**.
So a simplicial complex is a set of simplices closed under the operation of taking non-empty subsets.

**Definition:**
A **geometric simplex** $ \Delta $ is the convex hull of a set of affine independent points in a Euclidean space.
A **geometric simplicial complex** $\mathcal{K}$ is a collection of geometric simplices such that:
    1. Every face of a simplex in the complex is also in the complex.
    2. The intersection of any two simplices in the complex is either empty or a face of both simplices.

**Definition:**
A **geometric realization** of a simplicial complex $ K $ is a geometric simplicial complex $\mathcal{K}$ such that there is a bijection between the vertices of $ K $ and the vertices of $\mathcal{K}$, and the simplices of $ K $ correspond to the geometric simplices of $\mathcal{K}$.

**Remark**:
It is clear that every **geometric simplicial complex** induces a **simplicial complex** by considering the set of vertices and the combinatorial structure of the simplices.
It is also true that every **simplicial complex** admits a **geometric realization** in some Euclidean space, but this fact will not be proved here.

**Definition(Dimension):**
$$
    dim(\sigma) = |\sigma| - 1,
$$

**Definition(Dimension of a Simplicial Complex):**

$$
    dim(K) = \max_{\sigma \in K} dim(\sigma).
$$

**Definition(n-skeleton):**

$$
    K^n := \{\sigma \in K : dim(\sigma) \leq n\}
$$

### Operations on Simplicial Complexes

The union of two simplicial complex is just their set-theoretic union, we are also always assuming that simplicial complexes are disjoint sets.

**Definition:**
Given a subset of vertices $U\subseteq V$, the **generated simplex** $ \sigma(U) $ is defined as:

$$
    \sigma(U) := \{\sigma \in K : \sigma \subseteq U\}.
$$

It is clear that $ \sigma(U) $ is the smallest simplicial complex containing all vertices in $U$.
**Definition:**
A function $f: K_1^0 \to K_2^0$ is **simplicial** if

$$
    \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_k\} \in K_1 \implies \{f(v_1), f(v_2), \ldots, f(v_k)\} \in K_2
$$

and it induce a so called **simplicial map** between the simplicial complexes $K$ and $K'$.
A **simplicial isomorphism** is a bijective simplicial map whose inverse is also a simplicial map.

Given two isomophic simplicial complexes, it is possible to prove that their geometric realizations are homotopy equivalent topological spaces.

**Definition:**
Given two simplicial complexes $K_1, K_2$
The **union** of $K_1$ and $K_2$ is the simplicial complex $K_3 = K_1 \cup K_2$ defined as:

$$
    K_3 := K_1 \cup K_2
$$

where $ \cup $ is the set-theoretic union.

**Definition:**
Given two simplicial complexes $K_1, K_2$.
Two subcomplexes $L_1 \subseteq K_1$ and $L_2 \subseteq K_2$, and a simplicial isomorphism $f: L_1 \to L_2$.
The **glueing** of $K_1$ and $K_2$ along $f$ is the simplicial complex $K_3 = K_1 \cup_f K_2$ defined as:

$$
    K_3 := \frac{K_1 \cup K_2}{\sim}
$$

where $\sim$ is the equivalence relation generated by $v \sim f(v)$ for all $v \in L_1^0$.

**Definition:**
Given two simplicial complexes $K1, K_2$, the **join** of $K_1$ and $K_2$ is the simplicial complex $K_3 = K_1 * K_2$ defined as:

$$
    K_3 := K_1 \cup K_2 \cup \{\sigma_1 \cup \sigma_2 : \sigma_1 \in K_1, \sigma_2 \in K_2\},
$$

which geometrically corresponds to the join of the geometric realizations of $K_1$ and $K_2$.
In the geometric realizations $K_3$ is the complexes obtained by taking the convex hull of every pair of simplices from $K_1$ and $K_2$.

**Definition:**
The one point suspension of a simplicial complex $K$ is the join of $K$ with a 0-dimensional complex consisting of one vertices. 

## Geometry and Visualization

**Theorem**: 
Every simplicial complex $K$ such that $dim(K) = n$ can be embedded in $\mathbb{R}^{2n+1}$. 

This theorem says that even if my visualizations try to be as good as possible, they can never be topologically faithful for complexes of dimension greater than 1.
But for the complexes of dimension 1 (graphs) the visualization will be always topologically faithful.

## Homology and Betti Numbers
Homology is a way to associate a sequence of abelian groups or vector spaces to a simplicial complex, which can be used to study its "holes".

It is not the case to go into details about homology theory here, but I will just define the Betti numbers which are the main observational operation of the language.

**Definition(Betti Numbers):**
The $n$-th Betti number $ \beta_n(K) $ of a simplicicial complex $K$ is defined as the rank of the $n$-th homology group $H_n(K)$:

In this language we will use coefficients in $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ for homology, so the Betti numbers will count the number of n-dimensional holes in the simplicial complex which are "free" from torsion.

The reason why I chose to use homology with coefficients in $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ is that it is computationally simpler and faster to compute, since $\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$ is a field and linear algebra techniques are easier than commutative algebra ones.

### References
1. Wikipedia page of "Abstract Simplicial Complex": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_simplicial_complex
2. Allen Hatcher, "Algebraic Topology", Cambridge University Press, 2002.