docs/mathematics.md, before:

# Mathematics for Simplicial Complexes Language

In this file I will document the mathematical concepts and structures that I will use to implement the language for simplicial complexes.

## Simplicial Complexes

**Definition:**:
The **vertices** are *countable ordered* set 
$$ V := \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, \} $$. 
Each element of V is called a **vertex**.

**Definition:**
A **simplicial complex** $ K $ is a collection of finite subsets of V called **simplices** such that:

$$
    \text{For each } \sigma \in K \text{ and } \tau \subseteq \sigma, \text{} \tau \in K.
$$

Each element $ \sigma \in K $ is called a **simplex**.
So a simplicial complex is a set of simplices closed under the operation of taking non-empty subsets.

**Definition:**
A **geometric simplex** $ \Delta $ is the convex hull of a set of affine independent points in a Euclidean space.
A **geometric simplicial complex** $ \mathcal{K} $ is a collection of geometric simplices such that:
    1. Every face of a simplex in the complex is also in the complex.
    2. The intersection of any two simplices in the complex is either empty or a face of both simplices.

**Definition:**
A **geometric realization** of a simplicial complex $ K $ is a geometric simplicial complex $ \mathcal{K} $ such that there is a bijection between the vertices of $ K $ and the vertices of $ \mathcal{K} $, and the simplices of $ K $ correspond to the geometric simplices of $ \mathcal{K} $.

**Remark**:
It is clear that every **geometric simplicial complex** induces a **simplicial complex** by considering the set of vertices and the combinatorial structure of the simplices.
It is also true that every **simplicial complex** admits a **geometric realization** in some Euclidean space, but this fact will not be proved here.

**Definition(Dimension):**
$$
    dim(\sigma) = |\sigma| - 1,
$$

**Definition(Dimension of a Simplicial Complex):**

$$
    dim(K) = \max_{\sigma \in K} dim(\sigma).
$$

**Definition(n-skeleton):**

$$
    K^n := \{\sigma \in K : dim(\sigma) \leq n\}
$$

### Operations on Simplicial Complexes

The union of two simplicial complex is just their set-theoretic union, we are also always assuming that simplicial complexes are disjoint sets.

**Definition:**
Given a subset of vertices $ U \subseteq V $, the **generated simplex** $ \sigma(U) $ is defined as:

$$
    \sigma(U) := \{\sigma \in K : \sigma \subseteq U\}.
$$

It is clear that $ \sigma(U) $ is the smallest simplicial complex containing all vertices in $U$.
**Definition:**
A function $f: K_1^0 \to K_2^0$ is **simplicial** if

$$
    \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_k\} \in K_1 \implies \{f(v_1), f(v_2), \ldots, f(v_k)\} \in K_2
$$

and it induce a so called **simplicial map** between the simplicial complexes $ K $ and $ K' $.
A **simplicial isomorphism** is a bijective simplicial map whose inverse is also a simplicial map.

**Definition:**
Given two simplicial complexes $K_1, K_2$.
Two subcomplexes $L_1 \subseteq K_1$ and $L_2 \subseteq K_2$, and a simplicial isomorphism $f: L_1 \to L_2$.
The **glueing** of $K_1$ and $K_2$ along $f$ is the simplicial complex $ K_3 = K_1 \cup_f K_2$ defined as:

$$
    K_3 := \frac{K_1 \cup K_2}{\sim}
$$

where $ \sim $ is the equivalence relation generated by $ v \sim f(v) $ for all $ v \in L_1^0 $.


### References
1. Wikipedia page of "Abstract Simplicial Complex": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_simplicial_complex
2. Allen Hatcher, "Algebraic Topology", Cambridge University Press, 2002.

Commit message:

Refactor parser and main components to support complex declarations, update related methods, and enhance documentation.

docs/mathematics.md, after:

# Mathematics for Simplicial Complexes Language

In this file I will document the mathematical concepts and structures that I will use to implement the language for simplicial complexes.

## Simplicial Complexes

**Definition:**:
The **vertices** are *countable ordered* set 
$$ V := \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, \} $$. 
Each element of V is called a **vertex**.

**Definition:**
A **simplicial complex** $ K $ is a collection of finite subsets of V called **simplices** such that:

$$
    \text{For each } \sigma \in K \text{ and } \tau \subseteq \sigma, \text{} \tau \in K.
$$

Each element $ \sigma \in K $ is called a **simplex**.
So a simplicial complex is a set of simplices closed under the operation of taking non-empty subsets.

**Definition:**
A **geometric simplex** $ \Delta $ is the convex hull of a set of affine independent points in a Euclidean space.
A **geometric simplicial complex** $ \mathcal{K} $ is a collection of geometric simplices such that:
    1. Every face of a simplex in the complex is also in the complex.
    2. The intersection of any two simplices in the complex is either empty or a face of both simplices.

**Definition:**
A **geometric realization** of a simplicial complex $ K $ is a geometric simplicial complex $ \mathcal{K} $ such that there is a bijection between the vertices of $ K $ and the vertices of $ \mathcal{K} $, and the simplices of $ K $ correspond to the geometric simplices of $ \mathcal{K} $.

**Remark**:
It is clear that every **geometric simplicial complex** induces a **simplicial complex** by considering the set of vertices and the combinatorial structure of the simplices.
It is also true that every **simplicial complex** admits a **geometric realization** in some Euclidean space, but this fact will not be proved here.

**Definition(Dimension):**
$$
    dim(\sigma) = |\sigma| - 1,
$$

**Definition(Dimension of a Simplicial Complex):**

$$
    dim(K) = \max_{\sigma \in K} dim(\sigma).
$$

**Definition(n-skeleton):**

$$
    K^n := \{\sigma \in K : dim(\sigma) \leq n\}
$$

### Operations on Simplicial Complexes

The union of two simplicial complex is just their set-theoretic union, we are also always assuming that simplicial complexes are disjoint sets.

**Definition:**
Given a subset of vertices $ U \subseteq V $, the **generated simplex** $ \sigma(U) $ is defined as:

$$
    \sigma(U) := \{\sigma \in K : \sigma \subseteq U\}.
$$

It is clear that $ \sigma(U) $ is the smallest simplicial complex containing all vertices in $U$.
**Definition:**
A function $f: K_1^0 \to K_2^0$ is **simplicial** if

$$
    \{v_1, v_2, \ldots, v_k\} \in K_1 \implies \{f(v_1), f(v_2), \ldots, f(v_k)\} \in K_2
$$

and it induce a so called **simplicial map** between the simplicial complexes $ K $ and $ K' $.
A **simplicial isomorphism** is a bijective simplicial map whose inverse is also a simplicial map.

**Definition:**
Given two simplicial complexes $K_1, K_2$.
Two subcomplexes $L_1 \subseteq K_1$ and $L_2 \subseteq K_2$, and a simplicial isomorphism $f: L_1 \to L_2$.
The **glueing** of $K_1$ and $K_2$ along $f$ is the simplicial complex $ K_3 = K_1 \cup_f K_2$ defined as:

$$
    K_3 := \frac{K_1 \cup K_2}{\sim}
$$

where $ \sim $ is the equivalence relation generated by $ v \sim f(v) $ for all $ v \in L_1^0 $.

## Geometry and Visualization

**Theorem**: 
Every simplicial complex $K$ such that $dim(K) = n$ can be embedded in $\mathbb{R}^{2n+1}$. 

This means that, even if I found a way to visualize simplicial complexes of dimension 2 and 3, the visualization will not be always topologically faithful, since there could be intersections between simplices which are not present in the actual simplicial complex.

But $1-complexes$, which are a way of representing graphs, can be embedded in $\mathbb{R}^{3}$ without any intersections.


### References
1. Wikipedia page of "Abstract Simplicial Complex": https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_simplicial_complex
2. Allen Hatcher, "Algebraic Topology", Cambridge University Press, 2002.
